Text
Food hasn’t always come easily for the breweries at Southeast Belmont Street and Seventh Avenue. When it was The Commons, Cheese Bar’s Steve Jones set up an annex behind the brewery’s tap wall, slicing carefully chosen cheeses to pair with that brewery’s flagship Urban Farmhouse Ale. When San Diego brewery Modern Times took over in 2018, vegan burgers replaced the cheese. Beer was once again the sole focus after Living Häus opened last year; a QR code at the bar revealed a small menu of Japanese bar snacks from neighboring Afuri.But some recent activity indicates there might be more to get excited about at this century-old brick building than ever before. In June, Living Häus tapped Pan Con Queso, a new pop-up from pizzaiolo about town Henry Martinez (Dimo’s, Scottie’s) and mental health pro Makeila Magno, to act as a sort-of pizzeria in residence. (The brewery also hosted a guided beer-cheese pairing from La Femme Fromage, bringing things full circle.)Martinez and Magno describe their pies as “naturally leavened modernist pizza” inspired by the partners’ “combined Mexican and Pacific Islander heritage.” With ingredients including fresh corn, pickled jalapeño and house-made chorizo, plus a prominent tang to the dough thanks to a minimum four-day ferment, Pan Con Queso’s pizzettas, or “pixxas,” as they call them, aren’t quite like anything I’ve seen in Portland, or anywhere else. Yes, there’s a SPAM pizza, an idea suggested by Magno’s grandfather, who lived on the islands and liked to call the canned pork product “Hawaiian prime rib.” He died before he could try the pizza Martinez and Magno created and named for him, the Mr. MacArthur, which comes topped with SPAM, pineapple and red and green onions. Kahlua pork tortas are planned once Martinez dials in his telera roll recipe; ditto for a SPAM and egg breakfast sandwich on house-made muffins potentially coming on weekends. So far, the Mexican influences are the more prominent of the two, including the chorizo con papas, which converts the classic taco filling of chorizo and potatoes into a pizza with melted mozzarella and cotija cheeses all drizzled with a cilantro crema. For summer, there’s an elote pie inspired by Mexican street corn, drizzled with crema and sprinkled with spicy-tart Tajín flakes.The sides have their own Mexican touches — the great arugula and watermelon salad has a gently spiced chamoy dressing, while the Caesar was first made tableside at a Tijuana hotel (the original did not use anchovies; I wouldn’t mind more in Pan Con Queso’s). According to Martinez, the chorizo con papas was made on a whim for a farm dinner years ago. The enthused reaction from a diner helped inspire Pan Con Queso’s concept. After he and Magno moved to Portland, the duo became energized by the city’s pizza scene, which some have called the best in America. So after meeting Living Häus co-owner Mat Sandoval by chance, Martinez and Magno were able to send over a deck with their vision for a pizzeria operating out of the brewery’s dormant kitchen. Pan Con Queso’s closest comparison locally might be Hapa Pizza in Beaverton, another new restaurant that treats pizza as more of a starting point for exploring non-traditional toppings while taking its craft seriously. In Hapa’s case, puffier 12-inch pies are inspired by Asian dishes such as Thai curries and Vietnamese soup and often feature criss-crossing drizzles of sauce and plenty of herbs.
A new Portland pizzeria coming this fall will specialize in Neapolitan pizza, with portafoglio (wallet-style) folded pizzas sold through a takeout window by day, and more straightforward pies served in the dining room at night. And travel host Rick Steves is to thank. Seriously. Early in the pandemic, marketer Maya Setton and her husband Chris Flanagan were watching TV and brainstorming how they would afford daycare for their second child, who was already on the way.“So we’re sitting on the couch watching Rick Steves in Italy, and there was this 30-second blip on the screen where you see him show up and get one of these portafoglios,” Setton said. “And it was like, ‘That’s it, that’s brilliant: It’s portable. It’s made for the common person. We need to bring this to Portland.’” One big thing working in the couple’s favor: Flanagan is a chef with a long resume of cooking experience at Portland’s since-closed Ten-01 and Tabla, Oregon wine country’s Dundee Bistro and, more recently, at Mt. Hood Brewing’s Tilikum Station, a brewpub and pizzeria in Southeast Portland. Flanagan dove into the idea, eventually flying to Southern California to attend classes through the Associazione Verace Pizza Napoletana, where he says he earned a certification for his Neapolitan pizza skill. Grana — full name: Grana Pizza Napoletana — launched as a pop-up at the Vancouver Farmers Market last year, then snagged a spot at the Saturday market at Portland State University, closer to the duo’s Southwest Portland home. (The pair also hosted a fateful one-off at Montelupo, the Northeast 28th Avenue restaurant from Flanagan’s former Tabla boss Adam Berger, in 2022, when I first heard of Grana. According to Setton, the lines for that event — Grana’s first Portland pop-up — stretched for blocks, despite Flanagan cooking pizzas as fast as possible in their portable Ooni ovens.)At lunch, Grana will offer two or three folded pizzas from its takeout window, including a classic marinara, a margherita and perhaps a spicy diavola. At dinner, customers ordering and paying through a QR code will choose from five pizzas, including a chalkboard special, each cooked at high heat in around 90 seconds, as well as a few wood-fired small bites, a salad, a dessert and a short list of Italian wines. Despite the modern ordering system, other service elements will be in place at night, Setton said, including a host to seat guests, table-side wine pours and no bussing of dishes required.When it opens, Grana will join Portland’s already impressive — and still evolving — pizza scene, with a location just a short walk from at least five pizzerias, including Ken’s and its ever-present line.And it all happened because of a brief snippet of B-roll from a public TV travel show.“We are forever indebted to Rick Steves for that one,” Setton said.
Everything’s getting more expensive in Oregon these days, whether it’s gas prices, interest rates or groceries. Restaurants are no exception. As if things couldn’t be more bleak, Oregon was even recently listed as having the most expensive pizza in America. So I decided to embark on a challenge: eat three meals in one day with only $20. The Oregonian successfully embarked on this challenge before, but that was in 2017. A lot as changed in the economy since then, and heck, at that time I couldn’t even drive yet. Breakfast: Lox, Stocks, and Bagels. The best way to start the day is with a good breakfast, so my first stop of the day was at Lox Stocks, and Bagels. It opened in 2018 and bills itself as Eugene’s only boiled bagel stop. The shop offers a variety of bagel types, bialys, and a menu of delicious breakfast sandwiches. Every item is made the night before by their team of bakers and sold fresh the following morning.Lunch: El Buen Sabor. After letting breakfast digest, it was time to think about where I was eating next. So, I headed to the Whiteaker Neighborhood for some tacos at El Buen Sabor, a food cart offering Oaxacan cuisine. With two locations in Eugene, I opted for their stationary location which is open year-round and offers an adorable outdoor seating area. The menu includes a number of traditional Oaxacan delicacies like: Tlayudas, Huarache, Blanda and more - all made with the customers choice of protein.
good good a pizza brunch spaghetti
